Add DeepSemgrep docs (#532)
returntocorp/semgrep-docs: docs/deepsemgrep.md

This document demonstrates the utility of DeepSemgrep through use cases, guiding you through examples of Semgrep rules. Both Semgrep rules and code on which rules are tested are marked as code snippets and introduced always as a rule, code, or file used to illustrate the capabilities of DeepSemgrep.

### Obtaining DeepSemgrep

To get and install DeepSemgrep, follow these steps:

1. Submit your email using the [DeepSemgrep beta form](https://semgrep.dev/deep-semgrep-beta).
2. Follow the steps and instructions in the email you receive from the Semgrep team.
3. Start using DeepSemgrep with the following command:
    ```sh
    semgrep login
    ```
4. Follow the link that Semgrep prints to the command-line.
5. To install DeepSemgrep, use the following command:
    ```sh
    semgrep install-deep-semgrep
    ```
6. To test DeepSemgrep, use the following command with your own rules:
    ```sh
    semgrep --deep --config=myrule.yaml
    ```

Use DeepSemgrep in the command-line with `semgrep --deep`.

### Cloning DeepSemgrep testing code repository

> DeepSemgrep displays its full value with more files. This makes the usual embedded code that you can see in Semgrep examples not useful for demonstrating the capabilities of DeepSemgrep because embedded code from the Semgrep App only displays one rule and one test file at a time.

Author: @pabloest good idea! Thanks!

To learn by doing, use DeepSemgrep while reading this documentation. Follow this document while testing code examples in a [DeepSemgrep testing code repository](https://github.com/returntocorp/deep-semgrep-tests).

To find code examples used in this document, go to `docs` directory in the DeepSemgrep testing code repository. To see the difference between findings of DeepSemgrep compared to Semgrep, in each directory under `docs` run `semgrep --config deep.yaml` (obtain Semgrep findings) and then `semgrep --config deep.yaml . --deep` (obtain DeepSemgrep findings).

## Type inference and class inheritance

### Class inheritance

This section compares the possible findings of a scan across multiple files using Semgrep and DeepSemgrep. There is an `app.java` file that includes two check functions that throw exceptions. We are looking for methods that throw a particular exception, `ExampleException`. When using this rule, Semgrep matches code that throws `ExampleException` but not `BadRequest`. 

<iframe title="Semgrep example no prints"src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=adamkvitek:throw-exception-example" width="100%" height="432" frameborder="0"></iframe>

> This rule matches code that throws `ExampleException` but not `BadRequest`. Check other files in the `docs/class_inheritance` directory. In the context of all files, you can find that this match does **not** capture the whole picture. The `BadRequest` extends `ExampleException`:

Author: Deleting the last sentence of the previous paragraph. I think it makes sense to just describe what happened when a user clicks run in the iframe, and then reads what happened.

File `example_exception.java`:
```java
package example;

public class ExampleException extends Exception {

    public ExampleException(String exception) {
        super(exception);
    }
}
```

File `bad_request.java`:
```java
package example; 

class BadRequest extends ExampleException {
  public BadRequest(String exception) {
    super(exception);
  }
}
```

Where `ExampleException` is thrown, we also want to find `BadRequest`, because `BadRequest` is a child of `ExampleException`. Unlike Semgrep, DeepSemgrep can find `BadRequest`. Since DeepSemgrep uses information from all the files in the directory it scans, it detects `BadRequest` and finds both thrown exceptions.
 
If you are following in the cloned [DeepSemgrep testing repository](https://github.com/returntocorp/deep-semgrep-tests), in the `docs/class_inheritance` directory, try the following commands to test the difference:

1. Run Semgrep:
    ```sh
    semgrep --config deep.yaml .
    ```
2. Run DeepSemgrep:
    ```sh
    semgrep --config deep.yaml . --deep
    ```

### Using class inheritance with typed metavariables

> DeepSemgrep uses interfile class inheritance information when matching [typed metavariables](https://semgrep.dev/docs/writing-rules/pattern-syntax/#typed-metavariables). Continuing the example from the previous section, see the following example file, which has  defined some exceptions and includes their logging:

Author: ```suggestion
DeepSemgrep uses interfile class inheritance information when matching [typed metavariables](https://semgrep.dev/docs/writing-rules/pattern-syntax/#typed-metavariables). Continuing the example from the previous section, see the following example file, which has defined some exceptions and includes their logging:
```

<iframe title="Semgrep example no prints" src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=returntocorp:log-exception-example1-copy" width="100%" height="432" frameborder="0"></iframe>

The rule searches for any variable of type `ExampleException` being logged. Semgrep is **not** able to find instances of `BadRequest` being logged, unlike DeepSemgrep. Allowing typed metavariables to access information from the entire program enables users to query any variable for its type and use that information in conjunction with the rest of the code resulting in more accurate findings.

:::note

> For a more realistic example where typed metavariables are used, see the following [rule written by Semgrep community](https://semgrep.dev/playground/s/chegg:log4j2_tainted_argument) to find code vulnerable to the log4j vulnerability.

Author: @pabloest maybe you know about technical details of log4j more as well, just a little reword above...

> For a more realistic example where typed metavariables are used, see the following [rule written by Semgrep community](https://semgrep.dev/playground/s/chegg:log4j2_tainted_argument) to find code vulnerable to the log4j vulnerability.

Reviewer: I think the original is more conservative. In either case, you should keep “the” in there.

> For a more realistic example where typed metavariables are used, see the following [rule written by Semgrep community](https://semgrep.dev/playground/s/chegg:log4j2_tainted_argument) to find code vulnerable to the log4j vulnerability.

Author: @pabloest thank you! Let's use vulnerable then. Thanks for the article! Saved.

:::

Try to run DeepSemgrep in cloned [DeepSemgrep testing repository](https://github.com/returntocorp/deep-semgrep-tests). Go to `docs/class_inheritance_with_typed_metavariables` and run the following command:

```sh
semgrep --config deep.yaml . --deep
```

## Constant propagation

### Finding dangerous calls

[Constant propagation](https://semgrep.dev/docs/writing-rules/pattern-syntax/#constants) provides a syntax for eliminating false positives in Semgrep rules. Even if a variable is set to a constant before being used in a function call several lines below, Semgrep knows that it must have that value and matches the function call. For example, this rule looks for non-constant values passed to the `dangerous` function:

<iframe title="Semgrep example no prints" src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=adamkvitek:dangerous-call" width="100%" height="432" frameborder="0"></iframe>

Semgrep matches the first and second calls because Semgrep cannot find a constant value for either `user_input` or `EMPLOYEE_TABLE_NAME`.

> Now, let's make the example a bit more complicated to illustrate what DeepSemgrep can do. If the `EMPLOYEE_TABLE_NAME` is imported from a global constants file with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now consider an example a bit more complicated to illustrate what DeepSemgrep can do. If the `EMPLOYEE_TABLE_NAME` is imported from a global constants file with the following content:
```

Global constants file:
```java
package com.main;

public final class Constants {
    public static final double PI = 3.14159;
    public static final double PLANCK_CONSTANT = 6.62606896e-34;
    public static final String EMPLOYEE_TABLE_NAME = "Employees";
}
```

DeepSemgrep matches the first call without any change to the rule.

> Try to run DeepSemgrep in cloned [DeepSemgrep testing repository](https://github.com/returntocorp/deep-semgrep-tests). Go to `docs/constant_propagation_dangerous_calls` and run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try to run DeepSemgrep in the cloned [DeepSemgrep testing repository](https://github.com/returntocorp/deep-semgrep-tests). Go to `docs/constant_propagation_dangerous_calls` and run the following command:
```

```sh
semgrep --config deep.yaml . --deep
```
### Propagating values

In the previous example, we only cared whether the string was constant or not, so we used `”...”`, but constant propagation also propagates the constant value. To illustrate the use of DeepSemgrep with constant propagation, the rule from the previous section is changed to search for calls to `dangerous("Employees");`.

<iframe title="Semgrep example no prints" src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=adamkvitek:propagating-values" width="100%" height="432" frameborder="0"></iframe>

With DeepSemgrep, this rule matches the last three calls to `dangerous`, since these calls are selected from the `Employees` table, though each one obtains the table name differently:

> Try to run DeepSemgrep in cloned [DeepSemgrep testing repository](https://github.com/returntocorp/deep-semgrep-tests). Go to `docs/constant_propagation_propagating_values` and run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try to run DeepSemgrep in the cloned [DeepSemgrep testing repository](https://github.com/returntocorp/deep-semgrep-tests). Go to `docs/constant_propagation_propagating_values` and run the following command:
```

To continue with the previous example, we have modified our previous files a bit. Semgrep is searching for dangerous calls using data obtained by calling `get_user_input`. The rule does this by specifying the source of taint as `get_user_input(...)` and the sink as `dangerous(...);`.

<iframe title="Semgrep example no prints" src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=adamkvitek:dangerous-taint" width="100%" height="432" frameborder="0"></iframe>

Here, Semgrep matches `dangerous(“Select * from “ + user_input`), because `user_input` is obtained by calling `get_user_input`. However, it does not match the similar call using `still_user_input`, because its analysis does not cross function boundaries to know that `still_user_input` is a wrapper function for `user_input`.

DeepSemgrep matches both dangerous calls, because it does cross function boundaries. In fact, with DeepSemgrep, the taint rule can track calls to `get_user_input` over multiple jumps in multiple files. 

> Try to run DeepSemgrep in cloned [DeepSemgrep testing repository](https://github.com/returntocorp/deep-semgrep-tests). Go to `docs/taint_tracking` and run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try to run DeepSemgrep in the cloned [DeepSemgrep testing repository](https://github.com/returntocorp/deep-semgrep-tests). Go to `docs/taint_tracking` and run the following command:
```

description: "This document provides an overview of DeepSemgrep use cases, such as use of DeepSemgrep in type inferences, class inheritance, constant propagation, taint analysis."
---

# DeepSemgrep

## Introduction

Improve your scan results for entire codebases with interfile coding paradigms using DeepSemgrep instead of Semgrep's regular intrafile (within-a-single-file) approach. In most object-oriented programming styles, it is expected that classes are in different files. DeepSemgrep empowers you to easily scan whole repositories with classes in different files to find vulnerabilities in your code. DeepSemgrep is a proprietary extension of free and open source Semgrep which leverages global analysis tools, and uses the same rules as Semgrep.

This document demonstrates the utility of DeepSemgrep through use cases, guiding you through examples of Semgrep rules that you can use to search for particular patterns in code. Both Semgrep rules and code on which rules are tested are marked as code snippets and introduced always as a rule, code, or file used to illustrate the capabilities of DeepSemgrep.

## Obtaining DeepSemgrep

To get DeepSemgrep, follow these steps:

> 1. Submit your email on the following website [DeepSemgrep beta form](https://semgrep.dev/deep-semgrep-beta).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Submit your email using the [DeepSemgrep beta form](https://semgrep.dev/deep-semgrep-beta).
```

> 2. Semgrep team contacts you at your email address, follow the steps and instructions in the email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Follow the steps and instructions in the email you receive from the Semgrep team.
```

> 3. Start using DeepSemgrep by using the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Start using DeepSemgrep with the following command:
```

    ```sh
    semgrep login
    ```

> 4. Use a link that Semgrep prints to the command-line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Follow the link that Semgrep prints to the command-line.
```

5. Use the following commands:
    ```sh
    semgrep install-deep-semgrep
    ```

    And then:
    ```sh
    semgrep --deep --config=myrule.yaml

>     ```

Reviewer: Could these two steps be combined into one code block?

Author: Usually, I understand that people can read it, but it requires a certain cognitive investment, which we are usually trying to reduce in docs when possible. I rather divided it into separate steps:

```
5. Use the following commands:
    ```sh
    semgrep install-deep-semgrep
    ```
6. To test DeepSemgrep, use the following command:
    ```sh
    semgrep --deep --config=myrule.yaml
    ```
```

> Use DeepSemgrep in command-line with `semgrep --deep`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use DeepSemgrep in the command-line with `semgrep --deep`.
```

## Type inference and class inheritance

### Class inheritance

This section compares the possible findings of a scan across multiple files using Semgrep and DeepSemgrep.

To scan for methods that throw a particular exception, `ExampleException`, use the following rule:

```yaml
rules:
- id: throw-exception-example
  pattern: |
       throw new ExampleException(...);
  message: Throwing an ExampleException
  languages: [java]
  severity: ERROR
```

This rule matches code that throws `ExampleException` but not `BadRequest`:

> ```java

Reviewer: Note that syntax highlighting for Java isn’t working on Docusaurus right now. It looks like it is supported but not enabled by default. Could you turn it on? See this doc: https://docusaurus.io/docs/markdown-features/code-blocks#supported-languages

            throw new ExampleException(s);
        }
    }

    public void check2(String s) {
        if (is_bad(s)) {
            // ok: throw-exception-example
            throw new BadRequest(s);
        }
    }
}
```

Test an interactive example in the [Playground](https://semgrep.dev/s/emjin:throw-exception-example).

Now consider the case where `BadRequest` extends `ExampleException`:

File 1:
```java
package example;

public class ExampleException extends Exception {

    public ExampleException(String exception) {
        super(exception);
    }
}
```

File 2:
```java
package example; 

class BadRequest extends ExampleException {
  public BadRequest(String exception) {
    super(exception);
  }
}
```

It’s now necessary to change the rule to detect instances where `BadRequest` is thrown:

```java
package example;

public class App {
    public void check(String s) {
        if (is_bad(s)) {
            // rule-id: throw-exception-example
            throw new ExampleException(s);
        }
    }

    public void check2(String s) {
        if (is_bad(s)) {
            // rule-id: throw-exception-example
            throw new BadRequest(s);
        }
    }
}
```

> #### Using fully-qualified name in DeepSemgrep

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Using fully-qualified names in DeepSemgrep
```

Author: Removed from the docs draft.

   OutputStream os = he.getResponseBody();
   os.write(response.getBytes());
   os.close();
 }
}
 
public class main{
   public static final Logger logger;
 
   logger = LogManager.getLogger(someClass.class);
   public static void someFunc(int arg1, String bad, String somestr){
     // ruleid: log4j2_tainted_argument
       logger.error(String.Format("foo biz {}",bad));
   }
}
```

Test an interactive example in the [Playground](https://semgrep.dev/s/chegg:log4j2_tainted_argument).

This rule searches for any function called by an object of type `Logger`, using the restriction within an import for `org.apache.log4j.<ANYTHING>` to make sure that logger is a vulnerable log4j logger.

The log4j rule illustrates the use of typed metavariables in Semgrep. With DeepSemgrep you may achieve higher fidelity findings for the following reasons:

If another class extends the log4j `Logger`, as shown before, DeepSemgrep still detects it. If you have a safe wrapper, you can modify the rule to exclude matches using the safe wrapper class to avoid false positives.
If the `Logger` object is created by a factory method in another class, DeepSemgrep still detects it.

> #### Using fully-qualified name in DeepSemgrep

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Using fully-qualified names in DeepSemgrep
```
